DOCS-542: Update line follower tutorial (#1621)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/services/webcam-line-follower-robot.md

viamresources: [ "vision", "camera" ]
level: "Beginner"
date: "26 August 2022"

> updated: "5 July 2023"

Author: ```suggestion
updated: "4 August 2023"
```

**What you will learn**:

- How to use the [Vision Service](/services/vision/)'s [color detectors](/services/vision/detection/#configure-a-color_detector)
- How to use the [Python SDK](https://python.viam.dev/), including:
  - How to establish communication between the code you write and your robot
  - How to send commands to components of your robot

If you'd like to directly see the code, check out the [**Line Follower Code on GitHub**](https://github.com/viam-labs/line-follower/).

{{<imgproc src="/tutorials/webcam-line-follower/lf-scuttle2.png" resize="600x" declaredimensions=true alt="A SCUTTLE Robot base with a camera mounted on the front, pointing mostly down and slightly forwards.">}}

## Requirements

To build your own guardian robot, you need the following hardware:

> | Hardware | Approximate price |

Author: would have to apply manual styling and then we add multiple lines of content on the left instead so 🤷‍♀️. How about I just do "~Price"

<img width="725" alt="Screenshot 2023-08-04 at 22 48 14" src="https://github.com/viamrobotics/docs/assets/5212232/aaa3c9b8-d861-4015-998e-eda330516c92">

> | Hardware | Approximate price |

Author: ```suggestion
| Hardware | ~ Price |
```

| **RGB camera**: A common off-the-shelf webcam ([such as this](https://www.amazon.com/Webcam-Streaming-Recording-Built-Correction/dp/B07M6Y7355/ref=sr_1_5?keywords=webcam&qid=1658796392&sr=8-5&th=1)) connected to the Pi’s USB port, or something like an [ArduCam](https://www.uctronics.com/arducam-for-raspberry-pi-camera-module-with-case-5mp-1080p-for-raspberry-pi-3-3-b-and-more.html/) with a ribbon connector to the Pi’s camera module port. **You must mount the camera to the front of the rover pointing down towards the floor.** | $30 |
| **Colored tape**: Any color is suitable as long as the color is somewhat different from the floor color. For our tutorial, we used green electrical tape. | $4 |
| **Floor space**: Non-shiny floors tend to work best. | - |

### Install `viam-server` and connect to your robot

Go to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and create a new robot called `follower`.

Go to the **Setup** tab of your new robot's page and follow the steps [to install `viam-server` on your computer](/installation/).
Follow the instructions until the Viam App shows that your robot has successfully connected.

## Configure your components

{{< tabs >}}

> {{% tab name="Builder UI" %}}

Author: good point on step 5

Click on the **Components** subtab and navigate to the **Create component** menu.

1. **Add the board.**

    Enter `local` for the name for your [board component](/components/board/), select the type `board`, and select the `pi` model.
    Then click **Create component**.

2. **Add the motors.**

    Enter `leftm` for the name for your left [motor component](/components/base/), select the type `motor`, and select the `gpio` model.
    Then click **Create component** and fill in the appropriate properties for your motor.
    Repeat the same for the right motor and call it `rightm`.

3. **Add the base.**

    Enter `scuttlebase` for the name for your [base component](/components/base/), select the type `base`, and select the `wheeled` model.
    Then click **Create component** and select the motors.

4. **Add the camera.**

    Create a [camera component](/components/camera/) with the name `my_camera`, the type `camera` and the model `webcam`.
    Click **Create Component** to add the camera.
    In the new camera panel, click the **Video Path** field to reveal a drop-down populated with camera paths that have been identified on your machine.

>     Select `video0`.

Author: ```suggestion
    Select the path to the camera you want to use.
```

> Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

Author: ```suggestion
5. Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Raw JSON" %}}

> On the [`Raw JSON` tab](/manage/configuration/#the-config-tab), replace the configuration with the following JSON configuration for your board, your motors, your base, and your camera:

Author: ```suggestion
On the [`Raw JSON` tab](/manage/configuration/#the-config-tab), replace the configuration with the following JSON configuration for your board, your motors, your base, and your camera:

{{< alert title="Note" color="note" >}}
Your `"video_path"` value may be different.
To find yours, follow [these instructions](/components/camera/webcam/#find-the-video_path).
{{< /alert >}}
```

**What you will learn**:

- How to use the [Vision Service](/services/vision/)'s [color detectors](/services/vision/detection/#configure-a-color_detector)
- How to use the [Python SDK](https://python.viam.dev/), including:
  - How to establish communication between the code you write and your robot
  - How to send commands to components of your robot

If you'd like to directly see the code, check out the [**Line Follower Code on GitHub**](https://github.com/viam-labs/line-follower/).

{{<imgproc src="/tutorials/webcam-line-follower/lf-scuttle2.png" resize="600x" declaredimensions=true alt="A SCUTTLE Robot base with a camera mounted on the front, pointing mostly down and slightly forwards.">}}

## Requirements

> To build your own guardian robot, you need the following hardware:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build your own line follower robot, you need the following hardware:
```

> | Hardware | ~ Price |

Author: ```suggestion
| Hardware | Avg. price |
```

| -------- | ----------------- |
| **A single board computer**: This tutorial uses a Raspberry Pi running a 64-bit Linux distribution. If you use a different board, configure your {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="board" text="board" >}} using the [instructions for your board](/installation/#prepare-your-board). | $60 |
| **A wheeled [base component](/components/base/)**: This tutorial uses a [SCUTTLE Robot](https://www.scuttlerobot.org/shop/), but any other wheeled base works as long as it can carry the board and camera, and is capable of turning in place. | $99+ |

> | **RGB camera**: A common off-the-shelf webcam (such as the [EMEET C690](https://www.amazon.com/Webcam-Streaming-Recording-Built-Correction/dp/B07M6Y7355/ref=sr_1_5?keywords=webcam&qid=1658796392&sr=8-5&th=1)) connected to the Pi’s USB port, or something like an [ArduCam](https://www.uctronics.com/arducam-for-raspberry-pi-camera-module-with-case-5mp-1080p-for-raspberry-pi-3-3-b-and-more.html/) with a ribbon connector to the Pi’s camera module port. **You must mount the camera to the front of the rover pointing down towards the floor.** | $30 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **RGB camera**: A common off-the-shelf webcam (such as the [EMEET C690](https://www.amazon.com/Webcam-Streaming-Recording-Built-Correction/dp/B07M6Y7355/ref=sr_1_5?keywords=webcam&qid=1658796392&sr=8-5&th=1)) connected to the Pi’s USB port, or something like an [ArduCam](https://www.uctronics.com/arducam-for-raspberry-pi-camera-module-with-case-5mp-1080p-for-raspberry-pi-3-3-b-and-more.html/) with a ribbon connector to the Pi’s camera module port. **You must mount the camera on the front of the rover, pointing down towards the floor.** | $30 |
```
[nit]

> | **RGB camera**: A common off-the-shelf webcam (such as the [EMEET C690](https://www.amazon.com/Webcam-Streaming-Recording-Built-Correction/dp/B07M6Y7355/ref=sr_1_5?keywords=webcam&qid=1658796392&sr=8-5&th=1)) connected to the Pi’s USB port, or something like an [ArduCam](https://www.uctronics.com/arducam-for-raspberry-pi-camera-module-with-case-5mp-1080p-for-raspberry-pi-3-3-b-and-more.html/) with a ribbon connector to the Pi’s camera module port. **You must mount the camera to the front of the rover pointing down towards the floor.** | $30 |

Author: true - don't feel strongly but might be more confusing if we leave it out dunno

## Configure your components

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Builder UI" %}}

Navigate to the **Config** tab of your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Click on the **Components** subtab and navigate to the **Create component** menu.

1. **Add the board.**

    Enter `local` for the name for your [board component](/components/board/), select the type `board`, and select the `pi` model.
    Then click **Create component**.

2. **Add the motors.**

    Enter `leftm` for the name for your left [motor component](/components/base/), select the type `motor`, and select the `gpio` model.
    Then click **Create component** and fill in the appropriate properties for your motor.
    Repeat the same for the right motor and call it `rightm`.

3. **Add the base.**

    Enter `scuttlebase` for the name for your [base component](/components/base/), select the type `base`, and select the `wheeled` model.
    Then click **Create component** and select the motors.

4. **Add the camera.**

    Create a [camera component](/components/camera/) with the name `my_camera`, the type `camera` and the model `webcam`.
    Click **Create Component** to add the camera.

>     In the new camera panel, click the **Video Path** field to reveal a drop-down populated with camera paths that have been identified on your machine.

Author: ```suggestion
    In the new camera panel, click the **Video Path** field to reveal a drop-down populated with camera paths that have been identified on your machine.
    {{< alert title="Note" color="note" >}}
    Your robot must be connected for automatic path discovery to work.
    {{< /alert >}}
```

>     In the new camera panel, click the **Video Path** field to reveal a drop-down populated with camera paths that have been identified on your machine.

Author: added note below

Click on the **Components** subtab and navigate to the **Create component** menu.

1. **Add the board.**

    Enter `local` for the name for your [board component](/components/board/), select the type `board`, and select the `pi` model.
    Then click **Create component**.

2. **Add the motors.**

    Enter `leftm` for the name for your left [motor component](/components/base/), select the type `motor`, and select the `gpio` model.
    Then click **Create component** and fill in the appropriate properties for your motor.
    Repeat the same for the right motor and call it `rightm`.

3. **Add the base.**

    Enter `scuttlebase` for the name for your [base component](/components/base/), select the type `base`, and select the `wheeled` model.
    Then click **Create component** and select the motors.

4. **Add the camera.**

    Create a [camera component](/components/camera/) with the name `my_camera`, the type `camera` and the model `webcam`.
    Click **Create Component** to add the camera.
    In the new camera panel, click the **Video Path** field to reveal a drop-down populated with camera paths that have been identified on your machine.

>     {{< alert title="Note" color="note" >}}
>     Your robot must be connected for automatic path discovery to work.
>     {{< /alert >}}

Author: ```suggestion
```

      },
      "depends_on": []
    }
  ]

> }

Author: We can add instructions at the top

> }

Author: done

```

Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Test your components

Navigate to your [robot's Control tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#control) to test your components.
Verify that it’s connected by refreshing the page and ensuring that **Last Online** (in the top banner) says, "Live."

1. Go to the **Control** tab, click on the base panel, and toggle the transform camera to on.
   Ensure the camera works as expected.

1. Enable the keyboard controls and move the base using your keyboard.
   Ensure that the base moves as expected.

   {{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}
   If one or both drive motors are going backwards, you can power down the Pi by running `sudo poweroff`, unplug the battery, and switch the wires to the motor before powering it back on.

>    {{< /alert >}}

Author: ^ not my writing - haven't actually even set this up ;). You'd have to ask the Original author ;)

>    {{< /alert >}}

Reviewer: This happens to people in general with all rovers, because with a plain DC motor there is no inherent forwards or backwards way to wire it. So there's always a 50/50 chance of having it backwards :D

>    {{< /alert >}}

Reviewer 2: Ah, thanks!! I was wondering -- very helpful!

   {{<gif webm_src="/tutorials/webcam-line-follower/lf-viamapp-base-view5.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/webcam-line-follower/lf-viamapp-base-view5.mp4" alt="Driving the base from the Viam app's CONTROL tab." max-width="600px">}}

## Configuring a color detector for the color of your tape line

You'll use the [Vision Service color detector](/services/vision/detection/#configure-a-color_detector/) to programmatically identify the line to follow.
But first, you need to get creative and use your colored tape to make a path for your robot to follow.
Perhaps a circle or other shape, or perhaps a path from one point of interest to another.

> Sharp corners will be more challenging for the robot to follow so consider creating more gentle curves.

Author: ^ @JessamyT is to blame I think :)

> Sharp corners will be more challenging for the robot to follow so consider creating more gentle curves.

Reviewer: Indeed. Thank you ;D

Once you have created your path, set your robot on the line such that the line appears in the front of the camera’s view.
Verify that the camera sees the line by viewing the camera feed on the **Control** tab of the robot page.

{{<imgproc src="/tutorials/webcam-line-follower/lf-cam-view6.png" resize="600x" declaredimensions=true alt="The camera view in the control tab on the robot page">}}

Now, let's configure the color detector so your rover can detect the line:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Builder UI" %}}

Next, navigate to the **Config** tab of your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Click on the **Services** subtab and navigate to the **Create service** menu.

1. **Add a vision service.**

>    Next, add a [detector](/services/vision/detection/) as a vision service to be able to make use of the ML model.

Author: that's copy pasta - there is no ml model

>    Next, add a [detector](/services/vision/detection/) as a vision service to be able to make use of the ML model.

Author: ```suggestion
   Next, add a [detector](/services/vision/detection/) as a vision service.
```

   Create an vision service with the name `green_detector`, the type `vision` and the model `color_detector`.
   Then click **Create Service**.

   In your vision service’s panel, select the color your vision service will be detecting, as well as a hue tolerance and a segment size (in pixels).

>    Use a color picker like [colorpicker.me](https://colorpicker.me/) to approximate the color of your line and get the corresponding hexadecimal hash to put in your config.

Reviewer 2: nit: most refer to this as the `hex code`, but `hexadecimal code` is fine if you want more formal. `Hash` is more for secrets, salt, and other uniquifiers, oh my.

```suggestion
   Use a color picker like [colorpicker.me](https://colorpicker.me/) to approximate the color of your line and get the corresponding hex code to put in your config.
```

>    We used `#19FFD9` to match the color of our green electrical tape.
>    We used a segment size of 100 pixels, and a tolerance of 0.06, but you can tweak these later to fine tune your line follower.

Author: ```suggestion
   We used #19FFD9 to match the color of our green electrical tape, and specified a segment size of 100 pixels with a tolerance of 0.06, but you can tweak these later to fine tune your line follower.
```

   Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

2. **Add a `transform` camera as a visualizer**

>    This step is optional, but if you'd like to see the bounding boxes that the color detector identifies, you'll need to configure a [transform camera](/components/camera/transform/).

Author: ```suggestion
   If you'd like to see the bounding boxes that the color detector identifies, you'll need to configure a [transform camera](/components/camera/transform/).
```

>    This isn't another piece of hardware, but rather a virtual "camera" that takes in the stream from the webcam we just configured and outputs a stream overlaid with bounding boxes representing the color detections.

Author: ^ @JessamyT

Now, let's configure the color detector so your rover can detect the line:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Builder UI" %}}

Next, navigate to the **Config** tab of your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Click on the **Services** subtab and navigate to the **Create service** menu.

1. **Add a vision service.**

   Next, add a [detector](/services/vision/detection/) as a vision service.
   Create an vision service with the name `green_detector`, the type `vision` and the model `color_detector`.
   Then click **Create Service**.

   In your vision service’s panel, select the color your vision service will be detecting, as well as a hue tolerance and a segment size (in pixels).
   Use a color picker like [colorpicker.me](https://colorpicker.me/) to approximate the color of your line and get the corresponding hex code to put in your config.
   We used #19FFD9 to match the color of our green electrical tape, and specified a segment size of 100 pixels with a tolerance of 0.06, but you can tweak these later to fine tune your line follower.

>    Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.
```

> 2. (optional) **Add a `transform` camera as a visualizer**

Author: ```suggestion
3. (optional) **Add a `transform` camera as a visualizer**
```

   If you'd like to see the bounding boxes that the color detector identifies, you'll need to configure a [transform camera](/components/camera/transform/).
   This isn't another piece of hardware, but rather a virtual "camera" that takes in the stream from the webcam we just configured and outputs a stream overlaid with bounding boxes representing the color detections.

   Click on the **Components** subtab and navigate to the **Create component** menu.
   Create a [transform camera](/components/camera/transform/) with the name `transform_cam`, the type `camera` and the model `transform`.

   Replace the attributes JSON object with the following object which specifies the camera source that the `transform` camera will be using and defines a pipeline that adds the defined `detector`:

   ```json
   {
     "source": "my_camera",
     "pipeline": [
        {
          "type": "detections",
          "attributes": {
              "detector_name": "green_detector",
              "confidence_threshold": 0.6
          }
        }
      ]
   }
   ```

> Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

Author: ```suggestion
4. Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.
```

      },
      "depends_on": []
    }
  ]
}
```

Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Test your components

Navigate to your [robot's **Control** tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#control) to test your components.
Verify that it’s connected by refreshing the page and ensuring that **Last Online** (in the top banner) says, "Live."

1. Go to the **Control** tab, click on the base panel, and toggle the transform camera to on.
   Ensure the camera works as expected.

1. Enable the keyboard controls and move the base using your keyboard.
   Ensure that the base moves as expected.

   {{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}
   If one or both drive motors are going backwards, you can power down the Pi by running `sudo poweroff`, unplug the battery, and switch the wires to the motor before powering it back on.
   {{< /alert >}}

   {{<gif webm_src="/tutorials/webcam-line-follower/lf-viamapp-base-view5.webm" mp4_src="/tutorials/webcam-line-follower/lf-viamapp-base-view5.mp4" alt="Driving the base from the Viam app's CONTROL tab." class="aligncenter" max-width="600px">}}

## Configuring a color detector for the color of your tape line

> You'll use the [Vision Service color detector](/services/vision/detection/#configure-a-color_detector/) to programmatically identify the line to follow.

Author: ```suggestion
You'll use the [Vision Service color detector](/services/vision/detection/#configure-a-color_detector) to programmatically identify the line to follow.
```

Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

## How line following works
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

You position the rover so that its camera can see the colored line.
## Test your color detector

If the color of the line is detected in the top center of the camera frame, the rover will drive forward.
When it doesn’t see the line color there, it will search for the color in the left side of the camera frame.
If it detects the color there, it will turn to the left.
If it doesn’t see the color there it’ll repeat the process on the right.
Once the line is back in the center front of the camera frame, the rover continues forward.
Navigate to your [robot's Control tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#control) to test the transform camera.
Click on the transform camera panel and toggle the camera on, you should now be able to view the camera feed with color detector overlays superimposed on the image.

![A screenshot of the CONTROL tab showing the base card with the show_detections transform camera stream displayed. A green line crosses the left portion of the camera image, and a red box around it is labeled "cyan: 1.00".](/tutorials/webcam-line-follower/bounding.png)

> When the rover no longer sees any of the line color anywhere in the front portion of the camera frame, it stops and the program ends.

Author: done!

> To make your rover follow your line, you need to install Python and the Viam Python SDK and then write the logic for the line following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make your rover follow your line, you need to install Python and the Viam Python SDK and then write the logic that handles navigation along the line:
```

}
```

Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Test your color detector

Navigate to your [robot's Control tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#control) to test the transform camera.
Click on the transform camera panel and toggle the camera on.
You should now be able to view the camera feed with color detector overlays superimposed on the image.

![A screenshot of the CONTROL tab showing the base card with the show_detections transform camera stream displayed. A green line crosses the left portion of the camera image, and a red box around it is labeled "cyan: 1.00".](/tutorials/webcam-line-follower/bounding.png)

> 

Author: ```suggestion

If the camera feed does not render color detector overlays on top of the colored tape, adjust the color hex code and the hue tolerance in the Vision service configuration until it is able to do so successfully.

```

}
```

Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Test your color detector

> Navigate to your [robot's Control tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#control) to test the transform camera.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to your [robot's **Control** tab](/manage/fleet/robots/#control) to test the transform camera.
```
[nit]

   python --version
   ```

   or

   ```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   python3 --version
   ```

2. Install the [Viam Python SDK](https://python.viam.dev/) by running

   ```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   pip install viam-sdk
   ```

   or

   ```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   pip3 install viam-sdk
   ```

### Code for line following

1. Download the [robot line follower code](https://github.com/viam-labs/line-follower/blob/main/rgb_follower.py).

1. From your robot’s page on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/), go to the **Code sample** tab and select **Python**.

   {{% snippet "show-secret.md" %}}

>    Copy the robot's address and secret and add them into your code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Copy the robot's address and secret and paste them into the definition for the `connect()` function, replacing the two placeholders shown there.
```

1. You can run the program from your computer or from your Pi.

>    If you would like to get your program onto your pi, you have a few options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If you would like to get your program onto your Pi, you have a few options.
```

  ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
  async def is_color_there(camera, vis, detector_name, location):
      """
      Returns whether the appropriate path color is detected to the left/right of the robot's front.
      """
      frame = await camera.get_image(mime_type="image/jpeg")
      x, y = frame.size[0], frame.size[1]

      if location == "left":
          # Crop image to get only the left two fifths of the original image
          cropped_frame = frame.crop((0, 0, x / 2.5, y))

          detections = await vis.get_detections(cropped_frame, detector_name)

      elif location == "right":
          # Crop image to get only the right two fifths of the original image
          cropped_frame = frame.crop((x / 1.25, 0, x, y))

          detections = await vis.get_detections(cropped_frame, detector_name)

      if detections != []:
          return True
      return False
  ```

- `stop_robot`: Stops the robot's motion.

  ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
  async def stop_robot(robot):
    """
    Stop the robot's motion.
    """
    base = Base.from_robot(robot, "scuttlebase")
    await base.stop()
  ```

> The `main` function connects to the robot and initializes each component, it then does the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `main` function connects to the robot and initializes each component, then performs the following tasks:
```

1. If the color of the line is detected in the top center of the camera frame, the rover drives forward.

> 2. When it doesn’t see the line color there, it checks for the color in the camera frame starting on the left.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. If the color is not detected in the top center, it checks the left side of the camera frame for the color.
```

   If it detects the color on the left, the robot turns left.

>    If it doesn’t detect the color on the left, it checks the right and turns right if it detects the color on the right.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If it doesn’t detect the color on the left, it checks the right side of the camera frame, and turns right if it detects the color.
```

> 3. After the line is back in the center front of the camera frame, the rover continues forward.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Once the line is back in the center front of the camera frame, the rover continues forward.
```

If your rover keeps driving off the line so fast that the color detector can’t keep up, you can try two things:

> - Slow down the move straight and turning speeds of the rover by decreasing the values of `linear_power` and `angular_power`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Slow down the forward movement and turning speeds of the rover by decreasing the values of `linear_power` and `angular_power` respectively.
```

>   - Conversely, if your rover is moving too slowly or stalling, increase the numbers (closer to 1.0 which represents full power).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Conversely, if your rover is moving too slowly or stalling, increase the numbers (closer to `1.0` which represents full power).
```
